### Code to assembly

Consider the following code:
```java
int a;
int b[10];

void foo () {
    a = 0;
    b[a] = a;
}
```

It is translated into assembly:

```assembly
ld $0, r0
ld $0x1000, r1
st r0, (r1)

ld (r1), r2
st @0x2000, r3

.pos 0x1000
a:          .long 0

.pos 0x2000
b_data:     .long 0
            .long 0
            ...
            .long 0
```

### The simple machine (SM213) ISA

Our instructions will always be either 2 or 6 bytes long.

## Global dynamic arrays

We can have a static array, but it is still only created at runtime because we have to use the keyword 'new'. 

Even though b is statically allocated, it points to an array that is dynamically allocated.

```c
int a;
int* b;
void foo() {
    b = malloc(10*sizeof(int));
    b[a] = a;
}
```

In Java, we can store references to a dynamically allocated away using the 'new' statement:

```java
int[] b = new int[10];
```

In C, we can:
- store static arrays
```c
int bst[10];
```
- store pointers to other arrays
```c
int *bptr = &bst[0]; 
int *bptr = bst;
```
Both of these work. The name of the array itself means the address of the array.
- store pointers to arrays allocated dynamically by calling the malloc library function
```c
int *bdyn = malloc(10*sizeof(int));
```
malloc takes in the number of bytes, and returns an address to a location in memory it just created. malloc is different from the ampersand since & means "address of", but malloc creates the address first then returns it.

### Pointers in C

Java references are hereafter referred to as 'pointers' along with C pointers

Pointers are stored internally as an address, regardless of element type.

Any pointer can be cast to any pointer type.

C performs no array bounds checking. This is when your access manipulates memory that doesn't exist. This is a source of vulnerability.

Summary: an array is a list of items of the same type, named by non-negative integers starting at 0. In Java, variables store a pointer to the array. In C, variables can store a pointer to the array or the array itself (meaning the address of the array, which technically is the same address of the first element of the array). This is distinguished by variable type.

```c
int* b = array;
b[i]
```

### Pointer arithmetic

When adding an integer to a pointer, the integer is first multiplied by type size before adding. For example, if a is a pointer of int, then (a+i) is equivalent to 4i bytes ahead of a. The same holds for subtraction.

When we subtract two pointers of the same type, we return the number of elements of that type between the addresses. Essentially, we are dividing the address difference in bytes by type size.
```c
(a+i) = &a[i]
*(a+i)=a[i]
```


