### Instance variables

Variables that are an instance of a class or struct. These are usually created dynamically, and many instances of the same class/struct can co-exist.

In Java, objects are instances of non-static variables of a class.

In C, structs are names variable groups, or one of their instances.

Accessing an instance variable requires a pointer to a particular object, as well as the variable name (to pick out the variable).

### Structs in C

A struct is a collection of variables of whatever type, allocated and accessed together.

Declaration of a struct uses the keyword 'struct' followed by the name:

```c
struct D {
    int e;
    int f;
}

// static, use . operator
struct D d0;

// dynamic, use -> operator
struct D* d1;
```

technically you could also access the 'e' field of a dynamically allocated struct using ```d1[0].e``` since the first part gets the value.

A struct has no padding in memory. In other words, the address of the struct IS the address of the first thing in the struct.

### Struct Allocation

Static structs are allocated by the compiler, while dynamic structs are allocated at runtime. The struct itself is allocated with a call to malloc.

```c
void foo() {
    d1 = malloc(sizeof(struct D));
}
```
If malloc returned 0x2000, then d1->e is stored at 0x2000 and d1->f is stored at 0x2004.

Struct members can be accessed using offset. The offset to each variable from base of struct is static. (In other words, the variables are always stored in the same order). As before, static and dynamic differ by an extra memory access, since getting a pointer requires an extra memory read.

In the case of the SM213, all offsets that we provide will be multiples of 4. Therefore, the offset we pass in is divided by 4 (so that we have more possible large offsets)

### Recap

Scalar: Access memory at the address.

Array: Base address in register, dynamic index in another register. Then we access element using base + 4*index.

Struct: Base address in register, static offset for each field. Access memory at base plus static offset. This is equivalent to accessing an array element with static index.

Why do we use the offset approach for structs, but index for arrays? It's because using index for structs just makes you waste extra lines that we don't need, since we KNOW the position of each field.

We can put WHATEVER THE FUCKKK WE WANT!! inside a struct (including other structs, pointers, etc.)

Note the difference between having a struct as a field and having a POINTER to a struct as a field! THe first one contains all the fields of the other struct, while the second one only has a single field which points to the head of the other struct.

In a struct, alignment is determined according to the largest member type. Structs can mix types using padding.

The size of a struct has to be a multiple of its alignment. This is because we might want to put structs in an array.

### Arrays and structs

We can put arrays intto structs as a field.

We can also have an array of structs. Additionally, the array could just contain pointers to structs instead of the structs themselves.

Note:

```cpp
int* e[42];
```

is an array of 42 int pointers.

The name of an array does share similarities with a pointer (we can do pointer arithmetic on it). But it is not exactly the same as a pointer.

### Dynamic allocation in C and Java

Programs can allocate memory dynamically. Allocating memory reserves a range of memory for a purpose.

In Java, the ```new``` keyword allocates memory.

In C, ```malloc``` takes an unsigned integer as a parameter, and allocates that many bytes of memory. It's return type is ```void*```, which is a pointer to ANYTHING (no specific type assigned). It can be cast to and from any other pointer type, and cannot be dereferenced directly.

```cpp
int* p = malloc(100);
```

implicitly casts the void pointer to an int pointer. This is okay because all pointers are just addresses.

However, it is not a good idea to allocate a constant amount of memory, since some machines have different size ```int```s or other types $\rightarrow$ the code is no longer universally applicable.

We can nest ```sizeof``` inside malloc to determine how many bytes to allocate:

```cpp
struct Foo *f = malloc(sizeof(struct Foo));
```

WARNING!! ```sizeof(pointer)``` returns the size of the pointer itself, not the value it points to.


### Memory deallocation

Memory is a finite resource. We need to free memory that is no longer being used so that it can be re-used.

In Java, we have garbage collection. It deallocates memory when it is no longer in use, and deallocates it for you. However, this requires keeping track of every reference to an object.

In C, dynamic memory must be allocated explicity by calling ```free```. This deallocates the memory immediately, without checking if it is still in use.

---

**The heap** is a large section of memory, where ```malloc``` and ```free``` operate. The heap may be increased if necessary. ```malloc``` finds a free chunk of memory of appropriate size, marks it as allocated, then returns a pointer to the chunk. ```free``` uses that pointer, and then marks that chunk as free, which allows it to be overwritten. 

In Java, all objects are stored in the heap.

```delete``` is a ```C++``` thing (do NOT mention this, Jordan will get MAD).

Note that ```free``` does not erase the data stored. It simply allows ```malloc``` to reallocate that area of memory. However, we should not access this memory anymore, as depending on the OS, it could cause an access violation error.

Dangling pointers are pointers that point to objects that are not allocated for the correct purpose. It is often caused after freeing the memory a pointer points to, then accessing that pointer. This is an issue because malloc could overwrite this location and you would be writing to the wrong object (not necessarily the same type!).

### Memory leaks

Memory leaks happen when there is memory, but no pointer to it. This usually happens when we don't free memory properly. It can also happen if the pointer gets changed to another address. This is no good because we've just reduced our usable memory.

### Avoiding memory problems in C

Understand where the memory is allocated and freed! If it is possible, restricting dynamic allocation/free to a single procedure. This way, we can be sure that the memory is being freed, and debugging is simpler since we only have to look at one method. This is often done by merging two methods.

Another possible strategy is to not write procedures that return pointers. This is not always possible, but if it is, it can help with memory management since we don't want to be losing track of pointers.

Local variables are allocated on call and then automatically freed upon return. This is because they are allocated to the stack.

### Strings in C

A string is actually an array of characters in C. The end of a string is indicated by the first 0 (null) in the array. Thus every string has a maximum length, determined by the length of the array, and its length is determined by the first null.

We have certain operations we can do on strings, such as ```strlen```, as part of the standard C library.

### Valgrind

Detects memory leaks and dangling pointers!


### Multiple modules

ok wait u have 2 free hands u wanna take the notes
* objects representing you pass it to another part of program how does it know the whole program is done with you
* these modules do not communicate between each other

what do you know to free object?
* keep track of things being used - how many things currently using 

very bad! see image, deallocated a variable

FREEING VERY BAD RANDOMLY (do not rando pick place to run free() ex. end of module)

not good idea to free yet if something's pointing to the memory (keep track)

use ```reference counting``` to track object use
* initialize ref count = 1
* increment/decr count when pointers start/end pointing to object
* NEVER CALL COUNT directly: call when count is 0
* use ```rc_malloc``` (starts reference count & allocation)
* ```rc_free_ref``` free if ref count = 0


Here is a possible implementation:

```c
struct buffer *rc_malloc() {
    struct buffer *buf = malloc(sizeof(struct buffer));
    buf->ref_count = 1;
    return buf;
}

void rc_keep_ref(struct buffer *buf) {
    buf->ref_count++;
}

void rc_free_ref(struct buffer *buf) {
    buf->ref_count--;
    if (buf->ref_count == 0) {
        free buf; // if nothing is pointing, then free
    }
}
```

What are some downsides? ```ref_count``` is stored as part of `buf`, which requires two `->` operations to access. Also we have to use structs (ewwwww!)

Here's another implementation:

```c
// allocate n + 8 bytes, and use the first 8 to store ref_count. Then return the rest of the address, of size n. Outside of this, we don't even know about the extra 8 bytes.
void* rc_malloc(int n) { 
    int *ref_count = malloc(n+8);
    *ref_count = 1;

    // cast to void pointer since malloc returns void*
    return ((void*) ref_count) + 8; 
}

void rc_keep_ref(void *p) {
    // access the ref_count by moving back from the start of the object
    int *ref_count++ = p - 8;
    (*ref_count) ++;
}

void rc_free_ref(void *p) {
    int *ref_count++ = p - 8;
    (*ref_count) --;
    if (*ref_count == 0) {

        // if nothing is pointing, then free
        free (ref_count); 
    }
}
```

Note: booleans don't even exist in C! We just use 1's and 0's. Also, 0 is equivalent to `NULL`.

### Java Garbage collection!

---

Java is nice! The system tracks every object that you have allocated, and checks to see if there are objects that have no more references. Then it gets rid of these objects! (Garbage collection)

Thus we have
- no dangling pointers
- (almost) no memory leaks
- handles reference cycles

The last point is interesting. It happens when two objects point to each other. Even if neither object is still being used, technically they each have one thing pointing to each other (each other)! So `rc_free_ref` doesn't work! Garbage collection can detect these.


Then why use explicit free? Its faster! 

What are the advantages of reference counting?
    
- fewer memory management issues in complex situations

What about garbage collection?

- EVEN SAFER!! (but its slower)

But we should not ignore deallocation in Java! We can still technically have memory leaks, in objects that have references but are never used. The garbage collector will not reclaim this memory.