### Static control flow

---

We all know control flow... but now... $\huge{\text{IN ASSEMBLY!}}$

Every program execution can be described by a linear set of instructions.

You cannot ++ a static array address!

### GOTO statements

```java
for (i = 0; i < n; i++) {
    s += a[i];
}
```

can be translated to 

```java
        i = 0;
loop:   goto end_loop if not (1<n) // conditional goto
        s += a[i];
        i++;
        goto loop                  // unconditional goto
end_loop: // rest
```

### Control flow in the machine

PC stores the address of the next instruction to execute.

For sequential instructions, PC is updated in the fetch stage (then we increment it by 2 or 6 bytes). So, if we want to implement a goto, all we need to do is change the PC.

So, we have new instructions!

``` cpp
PC <- <address>                 // unconditional
PC <- <address> if <condition>  // conditional
```

The conditional is based on a register value, which is common in a RISC architecutre. In other Intel-based architecutre, it may be based on the last ALU computation.

However! Addresses are big and instructions that go to a specific address must also be large. Often times, we want to jump a short distance forwards or backwards. Which leads us to...

### Relative addressing

We specify the offset from the current location (current PC) in code rather than a specific address. Then we don't have to write long long instructions all the time anymore! This offset is signed because we may want to jump backwards. Jumps using relative addresses are called branches.

Example: suppose PC is at address `0x1000`, and we want to jump to `0x1008`. We could specify it absolutely, but that instruction would look like

`X--- 00001008`

As opposed to relative branching:

`Y- 03`

Why 3? Since we use PC as the base address, and PC is the address of the NEXT instruction, PC is at `0x1002`. Then the relative difference in address is 6. But since all offsets are even (because all instructions are 2 or 6 bytes), we might as well divide by 2 so that we can represent more numbers!

### For loops

In high-level programming languages, for loops have the general form 

```cpp
for (<init>; <condition>; <step>) {
        <loop_body>
}
```

Using goto statements, we can construct the following:

```
        <init>
loop:   goto end_loop if not <condition>
        <loop_body>
        <step>
        goto loop
end_loop:
```

### Conditionals

A conditional statement has the general form 

```cpp
if (<condition>) <then_statement> else <else_statement>
```

We can use goto statements again:

```
        c' = not condition
        goto then if (c' == 0)
else:   <else_statement>
        goto end_if
then:   <then_statement>
endif:
```

### Procedure calls

When a function calls another function, the caller `jump`s to the callee. This is a static jump, since the address of the function is known at compile time. But as the inner function returns, we have to `jump` again! But where?

Several functions could call the same inner function. How would we know where to return to? Since we cannot know at compile time, it is a dynamic `jump`.

A ***Return Address*** is the address that a procedure jumps to after it completes. It contains the address of the instruction immediately following the call that caused the procedure to run.

Only the caller can provide the address. So the caller must save it before it makes the call. By convention, it stores this in r[6]. To do this, we introduce a new instruction thats reads the `PC`, called `gpc`. Then the callee assumes the caller stored the address in r[6], and jumps there. 

But we're trying to jump to an address stored in a register! So we need a new instruction, `indirect jump`, which jumps to the address given by a register.


