### Procedures and the Stack

---

We know we store the return address in `r6` when we call another procedure. But what if we nest two or more procedure calls? Then the inner call overwrites `r6`, and we can no longer return to the outermost scope!

As for function parameters, we can't statically allocate them. It is possible that the function is recursive or calls another function that eventually calls the original function again. In either case, the static address would be overwritten! So it's time to do it dynamically!

### Life of a local variable/argument

We know that local variables are restricted by scope. They can only be accessed within the declaring procedure. Each execution has its own private copy. 

In terms of lifetime, the variables are allocated when the procedure starts, and freed when the procedure returns.

There can be many activations of the same procedure "alive" at once. Each has its own "activation frame".

The `Call Stack` is a stack of activation frames. It has a stack pointer, which moves along the stack, which "allocates" and "deallocates".

But we need to keep track of this stack pointer! So we use `r5` for it. 

The call stack is stored in memory, and grows up (towards `lower addresses`). It points to the TOP of the frame!

### Activation frames

We can think of each activation frame as a `struct`. Therefore, each frame's size is usually static!

What is actually kept in an activation frame? We obviously need to keep track of local variables and arguments. 

However, we also hold the return address, which comes from `r6` (the address to whatever called the procedure). This is only saved if it is needed (if the procedure makes another function call, which would overwrite `r6`). 

We would also like to keep track of some registers. Some values must be kept after another function call, and so they are saved beforehand.

By convention, the order is 

- Saved registers
- Local variables
- Return address
- Arguments

Also, we order the arguments in the order they were provided in the function call. The same applies for the local variables, in order of declaration.

We access Frames similarly to how we access structs in memory: the base is found in `r5`, and the offset is known statically!

We did say that the size of an activation frame is "usually" static. How can it be dynamic? If we declare an array of dynamic size using `int a[n]`, where `n` is an argument provided at runtime, then the size of the frame would also be dynamic.

---

There is some allocation that has to happen whenever a caller calls a callee. The caller knows the size of the arguments it provides (caller prologue), and the callee knows details about local variables, etc (callee prologue). So together they allocate the required space.

The caller stores the return address into `r6`, which is then read by the callee, which stores this address in the activation frame (alongside local variables).

## Creating the stack

---

Every program thread starts with a `hidden procedure`. The exact name varies, but its usually `start` or `entrypoint`.

This procedure `allocates memory for the stack`, `initializes the stack pointer`, and `calls main()`.

```
start:  ld $stackBottom, r5
        inca r5
        gpc $6, r6
        j main
        halt
```

### Optimizations

The number and size of arguments is statically determined, however their value(s) are dynamically determined. The compiler may choose to put the argument values onto the stack, which is what we will do in CS213. But it is also possible for a compiler to store them in registers. 

C compilers use `r0` as the designated register for the return value. We can still use it, but it just can't store information that needs to be carried through several function calls/returns.

The return address does not need to be saved to the stack if the function doesn't call anything else.

Its also possible that local variables can be stored in registers instead of on the stack, sometimes.

### Buffer overflow
---

Everything in memory, like objects, the stack, and even machine code is just data. So malicious hackers can 'overwrite' existing data with their own malicious data, which can be eventually interpreted as code. The end goal is to gain shell access, which lets them do whatever they want.

The attacker's goal is to introduce code from the outside and trick the program into running it. It does this by changing the return address, causing it to point to some specific data, which is then interpreted as code!

### Stack Smash

---

A stack smash attack is what was just described above. 

It is difficult in that we usually don't know from the outside where exactly the return address is. Also, we need to determine the address to change the return address to. 

However, we can make it easier. We can just insert MANY MANY copies of the return address, and hope that one of them ends up lining up with the return address. 

Also, knowing exactly where to jump can be made easier! Remember that we have the instruction `nop`, which does nothing at all. So, we just set up our input string as follows:
```
nop
nop
nop
nop
nop
...
nop
nop
get_shell
```

 So we can try and guess where the return value is approximately, and go a little before. Then chances are, we land on one of the `nop`s and "slide" down to the malicious line. In other words, we just need to guess somewhere within the nop slide.


