## Dynamic Control flow

Since functions have addresses in memory, we can jump to them! In C:

```c
void (*fn)(int, int)
```

represents a function named `fn` which takes in two arguments: two `int`s.

Imagine writing an implementation for quicksort, which only works on integers as it performs comparisons using the `<=` operator. But what if we wanted to sort strings? Instead of using the `<=` operator, we can make a call to quicksort take in a comparison function, which will be used to compare any two arbitrary elements.

So the quicksort function signature will take in an additional parameter 
```c
int (*cmp)(void*, void*)
```

The standard C library has a `qsort` function which takes in the base of the array, the number of elements, the size of each element, and a comparison function.

`strcmp` is another C library function that compares strings.

### void*

---

What exactly is void*? Its JUST an address. It cannot be dereferenced, since we don't know what it's supposed to point to! We use it to represent a pointer to anything.

To use a void pointer, we have to cast it. When you cast this way, there is no type checking! 

But things get confusing AF when we start dealing with `void**`.

`typedef` creates a new type name for a type expression, which leads to more readable code. A common convention is to end type names with "_t".

Example:

```c
typedef void* element_t
element_t*
void**
```
The 2nd and 3rd line are equivalent!

Remember in Racket when we used functions like `map` and `foldl` which took in functions as arguments? Or local functions using lambda! Everything is a function pointer!!!!


### Finalizers

A finalizer is a function that "cleans up" the object before it's freed. Then the function should be passed to the `rc_malloc` call!

```c
struct element *e = rc_malloc(sizeof(*e), element_finalizer);
```

With finalizers, we no longer add a constant 8 bytes for the reference count. We have to assign some space for the combined size of the metadata of the object, which includes refcount AND the finalizer.

Note that the finalizer itself does not free the object.


## Polymorphism

* variable store object has static type
* object ref is dynamic
* object actual type can override method's apparent type
### polymorphic
* target method address -> depends on actual type of ref object
* invoke diff methods at diff times



### Polymorphic dispatch

Since we cannot know where the target address in a prodecure call might be (due to subtype overriding), we need to lookup this address at runtime.

Each class is represented by a class object, that each `instance` of the class stores a pointer to. (the pointer points to the actual type, not apparent). Then this class object stores the class's `jump table`, which stores the addresses of methods implemented by the class. 

The location of the `jump table` is determined dynamically, but the offset of each method within it is known statically (Since everything is just addresses). Furthermore, methods are stored in the same order when we deal with subclasses inheriting parent's methods.

### Implementing Polymorphism in C

Since polymorphism doesn't exist in C, its time to make it ourselves. We can define a struct, which contains function pointers (methods). Every call to one of these methods must be provided with the object that called it as a parameter (Java does this implicitly with `this`).

If a subclass implements more methods, they just sit below the rest of the methods. The same applies for instance variables (If B is a subclass of A, then it will have all the instance variables of A, followed by new ones).

Now we can cast a B pointer to an A pointer, and everything will work out!

### Switch statements

Implementing these in assembly by using a ton of `if` statements would be loooong AF! 

So its time to use `jump tables` again!!!!! This makes the computation more efficient, as there are generally less instructions.

But jump tables have a limitation. You need addresses for all values from 0 up to the table limit. But sometimes, we don't want to check each case (0, 1, 2, etc). Then we will have gaps!

Also, what if there is no case 0 in the first place? Our array would still have to begin from 0. And what about negative cases????

So, our strategy will depend on the scenario. If the cases are sparse, or there are very few cases, use `if`s. Otherwise, we should use a `jump table`. In a `jump table`, we build an array of addresses for label values between the lowest and highest cases. If there are gaps, they shouild go to `default`, similar to when the index is out of range.





