## Virtual Processors (Threads)

A thread (or process) is a single stream of synchronous execution of a program. It can be stopped and resumed at any moment. For example, it could be stopped when it is waiting for an event, and resumed when the event fires.

Thus a thread gives the illusion of a single system.

We can have several threads running on a single CPU. 

When a thread is first created, it is called "`nascent`". It is waiting for a CPU to become available to run it. When this happens, the thread is then called "`running`".

There are 2 ways for a running thread to "stop" execution:

1. It can `block` itself (Cannot continue running until an event fires)
2. It can `yield` (Be nice and allow another thread to execute)

When a running thread yields, it becomes "`runnable`". This is very similar to nascent thread, so all threads that are either `nascent` or `runnable` are placed in a shared queue.

When a thread finishes executing, it is `dead`!!! We might hang onto its corpse if we are interested in its return value, but eventually we will cremate it and the thread is now `freed`.

### Thread operations - Create

This "forks" the control stream and starts a new thread. If a CPU is immediately available, the thread gets executed. Otherwise, it gets thrown as a `nascent` thread into the queue.

### Thread operations - Block/Unblock

Blocking a thread involves saving its current state, and then switching to a different thread. 

Unblocking a thread just places it in the queue, it doesnt immediately execute it. The thread is not "rescheduled" until it has been unblocked, usually based on some criteria.

A thread can block itself, but any thread can be unblocked from any other thread.

```c
uthread_block();
uthread_unblock(thread t);
```

### Thread operations - Join

A join is a special type of `block`. Some threads depend on the output (final value) of another thread, or it just might want a specific thread to finish before executing any further. So we `block` the current thread UNTIL the target thread completes. 

When the target dies, it only `unblocks` (queues) the first thread. So it it not necessarily run immediately afterwards.

```c
uthread_join(thread t, void** rtnValuePtr);
```

Note: if the thread we try to join to is already `dead`, then nothing happens. The current thread does not queue itself.

### Thread operations - Detach

If a thread has NO other threads that plan to join with it, we `detach` the thread. This way, when the thread dies, we just immediately `free` it.

### Thread operations - Yield

We save the thread's state and switch to a different `runnable` thread. It can resume as soon as there is another free CPU, since it goes straight into the `runnable` queue. The save state is restored when we want to begin running again.


## Thread Scheduling

We need to consider some questions if there are more runnable threads than avaiable processors. 

- Maybe some threads are more `important` (have a higher `priority`)
- Should threads get `fair` access to the processor?
- Should threads be guaranteed to make progress?
- Should a thread be able to pre-empt (kick off the `CPU`) another?

### Priority Round-Robin Scheduling Policy


Each thread has a priority associated with it, and they are run in order or priority. In case of a tie, run the one that has been there the longest.

We can use a `priority queue`!! 😭😭😭😭

### Pre-emption

**Priority-based pre-emption:** This is when the current running thread is forced to `yield`. 

We could choose to do this whenever a thread with higher `priority` than the current running thread is runnable.

**Quantum-based pre-emption:** Each thread is assigned a `runtime quantum`, and the thread is pre-empted at the end of its `quantum`. (a `quantum` just means "a piece of", its not physics related)

But how do we even keep track of how long a thread has been running? We use a I/O controller that is connected to a clock, which interrupts the `CPU` at regular intervals.

